(gentle music)
- [Voiceover] Several
grains of the ancient world
are recently making a comeback
due to modern man's pursuit
of a healthier lifestyle.
Quinoa, amaranth, spelt,
some of the grains
that flourished
during the early civilization,
and yet perished as
the world entered
the modern era.
But if there is one
ancient grain that can
personify immortality,
that would be maize.
Belonging to the grass
tribe Andropogonae,
of the family gramineae,
maize or zea maize, is
believed to have been
cultivated first in Mesoamerica,
in 2100 BC.
The Mayan civilization,
one of the greatest
early civilizations
in America and in the world,
was primarily based on maize.
The Mayans were
great agriculturists.
They were not only
known for their
sophisticated irrigation system,
but also for the advanced
cultivating techniques
they used to develop
maize from a wild variety
of grass called teosinte.
For some time, maize's
true origin was a mystery
for botanists, archaeologists,
historians, and
even geneticists.
Many questioned if
teosinte is maize's
true ancestor, due to
their dissimilarities.
Until in 1932, American
Nobel Prize winner,
George Beadle of
Cornell University
conducted researches
and experiments
that scientifically
validated that maize
and teosinte share
similar chromosomes,
and that they came
from the same specie.
In a more recent study,
botanist John Doebley of
the University of Wisconsin,
was able to identify
maize's paternity.
By comparing DNA
profiles of teosinte
from various
geographical locations
and different
varieties of maize,
he found out that maize
and the teosinte found
in central Balsas River
Valley of southern Mexico,
were the most
genetically similar.
So, he postulated
that central Balsas
is the cradle of
maize evolution,
and estimated that
domestication occurred
about 9,000 years ago.
Maize is a very adaptable plant
since it can grow in
almost any type of soil,
except in soils
with high salinity.
And depending on the variety,
soil and climate conditions,
growing maize can
take as little as
60 days, or as long as 120 days.
It's a very tall
plant that grows up to
an average height of eight feet.
Its singular stem is
physically similar
to that of a bamboo cane.
With an average of 20
alternating internodes,
and from each node, a
leaf sprouts with an
average length of four feet.
It grows a tassel on
its top most part,
which can release
millions of grains,
and is responsible
for producing pollen
that can fertilize
the cob or ear.
A cob is usually 15
to 39 centimeters long
and can have up to 800 kernels.
Yellow is the most
famous color of maize.
However, due to
hybridization there are
over 60 varieties of this grain
in the market today,
and it comes in different colors
such as red, pink, black,
blue, and purple.
Each variety has
its specific use,
and it reaches the market
in a specific form.
For example, the
variety saccharata,
or rugosa, cultivated
to have young ears
and more sugar than
other varieties,
is known in the market
at "sweet corn".
The variety, amylacea,
grown to have starchy kernels,
is processed into what
we know as corn flower.
The variety everta,
arrives in the
market as popcorn.
And the variety
called indentata,
is mostly grown
as livestock feed,
and is an ingredient in
some industrial products.
It's simply fascinating
how a grain can
withstand the test
of time and history,
and remain invaluable
and indispensable today,
as it did thousands
of years ago.
(gentle music)
(upbeat music)
The ancient grain maize,
has provided the
Mayan civilization
a great service of
feeding and nourishing
its people, physically
and spiritually.
Aside from its religious roles,
its nutrient profile
is also responsible
for allowing the Mayans,
and other indigenous
Americans enjoy healthy lives.
Maize's high fiber content
makes it beneficial
to people who are at
risk of heart diseases,
due to its cholesterol
reducing capabilities.
The soluble fiber of
maize binds itself
with cholesterol and
excretes it naturally,
thus preventing the body
from absorbing it further.
Meanwhile, the
insoluble fiber of maize
removes toxins from
the digestive tract.
It absorbs water
which softens stools
for easier and more
regular bowel movements.
Since it prevents constipation,
promotes a cleaner and
healthier digestive system,
it reduces the risk
of colon cancer.
Maize has more
vitamin A compared
to other grains.
It has beta crypto-xanthin,
a phytonutrient,
converted into vitamin A,
and is believed to
have anti-inflammatory
properties that
can benefit people
with rheumatic arthritis.
It can also provide
B vitamins, thiamin,
niacin, and folate, which
promote healthy nerves,
and cognitive functions.
These also aid the
body's natural metabolism
process by facilitating
the conversion
of carbohydrates into energy.
Folic acid deficiency
is common among pregnant
women, so eating maize
may keep them and
their babies nourished
throughout the pregnancy.
Potassium,
phosphorous, megnesium
are maizes top three minerals,
which are all crucial in
maintaining bone health.
In addition, magnesium
also contributes
in regulating heart rate.
Maize also contains
various anti-oxidants,
and phytonutrients.
However, presence and amounts
depend on the variety.
For example, yellow
corn is rich in
carotenoids, lutein,
and zeaxanthin.
Blue corn has a high
anthocyanin content.
And purple corn contains
protocatechuic acid.
Other phytonutrients
found in maize are
ferulic acid, beta-carotene,
vanillic acid, coumaric acid,
caffeic acid, and syringic acid.
To fully appreciate
its nutritional value,
here's how much 100
grams of maize can
contribute to a person's
daily requirement
of nutrients,
minerals, and vitamins.
100 grams of maize can
provide a person with
eleven percent of
his daily requirement
of dietary fiber,
six percent of his
protein and carbohydrate
requirements,
and four percent of his
calorie requirement.
For a person's daily
requirement of mineral intake,
100 grams of maize can provide
nine percent magnesium,
nine percent phosphorous,
eight percent potassium,
and eight percent manganese.
Intake of 100 grams
of maize also provides
thirteen percent of the
daily required thiamin,
eleven percent of the
daily required Vitamin C
and folate, and
nine percent of the
daily required niacin.
Good thing maize comes
in varying forms,
so it can be enjoyed
in numerous ways.
Whether it's consumed
as an ingredient
in baked goods, as
a morning cereal,
or straight from the cob,
maize is undeniably
one of nature's
greatest gifts to mankind.
(gentle piano music)
(gentle music)
(upbeat music)
Many of the early
cultures of the world
highly revered
nature for providing
almost everything
that mankind needs
for the continuance
of its specie.
The Mayan civilization
regarded maize
as a sacred grain.
For the Mayans, maize
played a key role
in their creation.
According to legend,
men were made from
a white corn seed hidden inside
a great mountain.
A rain deity used an ax
made from lightening,
to split open the mountain.
This burnt some
of the corn seeds,
resulting in other seed colors,
yellow, black,
and red.
The deities then
took the corn seeds,
ground them, and
used them as dough
to form the first humans.
The Native Americans
who migrated north,
also have legends
centering on maize.
The Sauk, and Mesquakie Indians
who lived in what
we know now as Iowa,
had a story on how
maize, or corn,
came to be.
According to their legend,
while two of their
ancestors were sitting
by a fire roasting
a deer to eat,
a beautiful woman
descended to Earth
from the clouds.
Assuming that the
woman was hungry,
they offered the deer to her.
After that, the woman
instructed them to
return to that
place after one year
to get their reward.
The woman floated
back to the clouds
and disappeared.
A year later, together
with their village people,
they returned to the
place and they saw maize
growing from where
the woman's right
hand had rested,
beans from where
left hand rested,
and tobacco from
where she was seated.
Other societies from
Mesoamerica also had
legends and deities
dedicated to maize.
The Aztecs had Centeotl,
and Chicomeocatl,
the god and goddess
of corn respectively.
The Cherokees had the
corn goddess Selu.
And the Keresan
people of the American
southwest had Iyatiku.
Maize also played a part
in the history of slavery.
Because maize was
one of the major
plantation crops, it
was one of the rations
usually given to
slaves along with
meat, peas, and okra.
Some of the common
foods slaves made
from maize were Cush, a sweet
and fried cornmeal cake.
Fufu, also called
Turnmeal and Flower
in South Carolina,
made by mixing cornmeal
and flower in a pot
of boiling water,
creating a mixture
to make a hotcake,
or ash cakes.
And Pone Bread, made
from a mush of cornmeal.
There is one fascinating
view on maize,
and that is how its
morphology embodies
the complementing natures
of a male and female.
The tassel, identified
as the male part
of a maize plant,
produces pollen that
fertilizes the ear,
the female part.
(upbeat music)
Different legends and
myths involving maize
have been handed down
from one generation
to the next.
But regardless of
these varying beliefs,
one truth remains,
and that is maize's
immense contribution
to man across history.
(gentle music)
(gentle piano music)
For 9,000 years, maize
remains one of the
top cultivated
crops in the world.
From its origin in Mesoamerica,
it traveled to Europe,
Africa, and Asia,
and offered its many
uses to other cultures.
According to the United
States' Department
of Agriculture database,
the United States
was top producer
of maize in 2011,
with 328,033,000 metric tons.
China came in second with
178,000,000 metric tons,
and Europe came in
third with 60,093,000
metric tons.
Brazil, Argentina,
Mexico, India,
Ukraine, South
Africa, and Canada
round off the top ten.
In 2012, the United States
remained the world's
top maize producer,
harvesting 87.4 million
acres of field, and
accounted for 32 percent
of the world's total harvest.
Corn is processed into
different products,
like flour,
flakes,
popcorn,
and cornmeal.
But it's also processed
to make corn oil,
syrups and sweeteners,
particularly high
fructose corn syrup.
And it's also a
traditional source
of bourbon whiskey.
In addition to its
traditional and conventional
uses in cooking and livestock,
it's also being used
to produced ethanol.
Wet milling and dry
milling are the two known
processes in creating ethanol.
Though both
processes effectively
produce ethanol from maize,
dry milling is
more commonly used.
Kernels are ground and
combined with water
to form a mash.
Enzymes are then added
to convert the starch
into a simple sugar
called dextrose.
Prior to fermentation,
bacteria levels are reduced
by cooking it in
high temperature.
And then yeast is added
to begin fermentation.
Sugar begins to be
converted into ethanol
and carbon dioxide.
After fermentation, ethanol
is finally distilled
and blended with about
five percent denaturant,
like natural gasoline,
before its distributed
and sold as biomass fuel.
(gentle piano music)
Ever wonder how ancient
maize wound up with
over sixty varieties?
It's because it's one
of botany and genetics
early favorite subjects.
In the early 1900's,
George Hall explored
maize cross-breeding, and
reported that hybrids,
or the cross-bred maize,
showed more vigor and yield.
His findings lead to better
cultivation and yield,
not just of maize, but
other crops as well,
which proved beneficial
during the war
and post-war eras.
No wonder maize managed
to remain in the
spotlight for
thousands of years.
Its food and non-food
uses made it a source
of endless fascination
and possibilities
for man's growing needs.
(gentle music)
(upbeat music)
Most grains are usually ground
before they can be consumed.
But not maize.
Certain varieties of maize,
particularly the sweetcorn,
can be eaten straight
from its cob.
Just boil it and then
season with butter,
salt, and pepper.
Italians have a native
dish called polenta,
made from a mash of ground corn,
and is today
synonymous to cornmeal.
Here's a simple cornmeal
recipe you can try called
Breakfast Cornmeal with
Warm Berry Compote.
For the compote you will need
one tablespoon of butter,
three tablespoons of honey,
one tablespoon of
fresh lemon juice,
a dash of ground cinnamon,
and assorted frozen berries.
To make the compote,
in a pan melt butter,
add the berries,
honey, and cinnamon.
Bring it to a boil,
then simmer until
thoroughly heated.
Mix in lemon juice,
and set aside.
For the cornmeal
prepare the following,
two cups of water,
two cups of milk,
one cup of cornmeal or polenta,
three tablespoons of sugar,
and one teaspoon salt.
Combine milk and one
cup water in a saucepan,
and bring to a boil.
In another bowl, combine
remaining one cup
of water, with cornmeal,
sugar, and salt.
Then add this mixture
to the boiling water.
Stir constantly to get
a thick consistency.
Reduce heat, let it cook
for another five minutes,
and then serve with
a berry compote.
Here's a refreshing
side dish using corn
called Sweetcorn with
Baby Beets and Basil.
Just prepare a
pinch of core salt,
and freshly ground pepper,
two ears of corn
husked and halved,
eight baby beets
trimmed and scrubbed,
extra virgin olive
oil for drizzling,
and one to two tablespoons
torn, fresh basil.
First, cook corn
in a pot of water,
season with salt and
bring it to a boil
in about four minutes.
Remove from water
and put on a plate.
Then cook the beets in
the same pot of water
for 30 to 35 minutes.
Cool them first before peeling
and cutting them into quarters.
Using a knife or corn kerneler,
separate the kernels on the cobs
and put them in a bowl.
Add the beets, drizzle with oil,
garnish with torn basil,
and lastly season with
salt and pepper to taste.
(gentle music)
It doesn't matter
whether you call it maize
or corn, it still refers
to that very unique
and versatile grain
which connects the modern
world to its early
and humble beginnings.
(gentle music)